# Hash Maps

## Lets go back a bit...

```js
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
// how do we get 2?
arr[2];
// how about here?
const arrObj = {0: 1, 1: 2, 2: 3, 3: 4, 4: 5}
arr[2];
```
A hash map is a data structure that stores key-value pairs, where each key is unique. It uses a technique called hashing to map keys to their corresponding values.

A hash key is a unique identifier for each key-value pair in the hash map. It is generated by passing the key through a hash function, which is a mathematical function that takes in an input (or key) and produces an output (or hash key) of a fixed size. The output, or hash key, is then used to index the value in the hash map.

The process of finding the value corresponding to a key is called a lookup, which is done by passing the key through the hash function to get the hash key, and then using the hash key to index the value in the hash map.

The hash function must satisfy two properties:

Return a unique hash key for each unique key.
Return the same hash key for the same key every time it is called.

Overall, a hash map is a powerful data structure that allows for efficient insertion, deletion, and lookup of key-value pairs, with a time complexity of O(1).

## lets break this down 

* Hash Maps is made up of Key value pairs.
* Looking up values in a Hash map should be (or close to) constant time (O(1)).
* When Inserting data it should be go trhough a hash function where return a hash key
* The hash key is uses to look up the values.

### Quick note about Hash functions.

Hash Functions are always pseudo random and a pure function. This means that they are not completely create random numbers every time they are ran because they must produce the same result with the same input every time. 

## The difference between arrays and hash maps

A Hash Maps (also known as a Hash Table) and an Arrays are both data structures that can be used to store and retrieve data, but they have different performance characteristics and use cases.

Retrieval: Hash Maps have a time complexity of O(1) for retrieval, which means that, o, it takes the same amount of time to retrieve a value regardless of the number of elements in the Hash Map. Because each value is stored in a specific location based on its key, the Hash Map uses a hash function to get the location of the desired value. On the other hand, an Array has a time complexity of O(1) if you use indexed access, but O(n) for searching through array, which means that it takes longer to find a specific element for larger arrays.

Insertion: Like retrieval, the time complexity remains O(1) for insertion. Again, the hash function gets the location needed quickly. An Array has a time complexity of O(1) to add elements at the end of the array, but O(n) for inserting elements at the beginning or middle of the array, because they values need to be shifted, which will take longer for larger Arrays.

Deletion: It remains O(1.) An Array has a time complexity of O(n) for deletion.